# Message Identifiers and Timestamps

## MessageHeader and Bundle Ids and Identifiers

A message contains at least two important ids and one identifier:

- the Bundle.id (Corresponds with the EnvelopeId in MedCom OIOXML Messages).
- the MessageHeader.id (Corresponds with the LetterId in MedCom OIOXML Messages).
- the Bundle.identifier

The Bundle.id is the unique id of a Bundle and is assigned by the FHIR framework. Each time a message is sent, the Bundle.id **SHALL** be changed to a new globally unique value. This **SHALL** be achieved by using a UUID. The Bundle.Id **SHALL** never be identical to a former sent Bundle.id.

The Bundle.identifier is also a unique identifier of a Bundle, but can be assigned explicitly by the sending application. The Bundle.identifier **MAY** be the assigned the same value as the Bundle.id.

The MessageHeader.id is the unique id of a MessageHeader and is assigned by the FHIR framework. Each time a new message is created, it **SHALL** be assigned a MessageHeader.id, that is globally unique. MessageHeader.id **SHALL** never be identical to a former sent MessageHeader.id.

When a receiver receives and processes the message, it **SHALL** respond with an Acknowledgement (a new message) with a new MessageHeader.id wrapped in a Bundle which also has a new Bundle.id. The response message **SHALL** also quote the request MessageHeader.id in MessageHeader.response.identifier so that the source system can relate the Acknowledgement to its request.

## Message Timestamps

A message has several important timestamps:

- Bundle.timestamp: Bundle.timestamp **SHALL** contain the time the message was assembled
- Provenance.occuredDateTime: The Provenance.occuredDateTime **SHALL** be a human readable time the message was sent
- Provenance.recorded: The Provenance.recorded **SHALL** be a machine understandable time the message was sent

In addition, the message **MAY** have additional timestamps in additional resources in the message. The meaning of these will depend on the message event.

Timestamps of the FHIR data type dateTime or instant **SHALL** include a timezone, which may be 'Z' or a timezone of the format '+00:00', e.g. '+01:00'. 